Caleob King: Hello, everybody, I hope you're doing all right. We were just talking about how it's state testing time, and some people will be, in and out
Caleob King: These next weeks, so watch for the recordings, they're gonna pop up.
Caleob King: We are continuing to talk about the mole.
Caleob King: And converting back and forth to mass to moles and other things.
Caleob King: And so, I, I made this little graphic to maybe help out.
Caleob King: Remember last time we spent talking about dimensional analysis?
Caleob King: Where we spent talking about how,
Caleob King: We wanted all the units to cancel out, so if you started out with moles, then you want to multiply by some conversion factor with those moles on the bottom of that conversion factor.
Caleob King: If we start out with grams, we want to…
Caleob King: start out with a conversion factor on the bottom that cancels out the grams. That's what we're going to be doing. We're going to be doing a little bit more complicated stuff here.
Caleob King: For instance, you don't always have to go… the conversion that we talked about.
Caleob King: Alright? Was going from massimoles, alright?
Caleob King: And, got a picture of a mole here. If you're going from moles to mass, Alright.
Caleob King: Then you'll want the mole, on the bottom.
Caleob King: And you'll want the mass of the mole on the top.
Caleob King: Alright, that's that red arrow. However, if you're going from mass to moles, you're going to multiply by the other way, so that the mass cancels out. We're going to do some examples on this, but we did that
Caleob King: Just a bit ago.
Caleob King: I'm gonna do a real quick one right there to kind of refresh.
Caleob King: If we have something like 36 grams of water.
Caleob King: And I want to know how many moles that is.
Caleob King: then I've got two choices.
Caleob King: I can use one of these conversion factors here. And first of all, before we decide which one, how did I get 18? Where did 18 come from here?
Caleob King: How do we… sorry, folks.
Caleob King: How do you find the molar mass of water?
Caleob King: It turns out to be half of 36, you're absolutely right.
Caleob King: But… What I would do is I would look on the periodic table.
Caleob King: And I would see that hydrogen weighs 1
Caleob King: and I would see that oxygen
Caleob King: Weighs 15, I'm sorry, 16.
Caleob King: And then I would do 16 plus 1 plus 1.
Caleob King: That's 1 oxygen and 2 hydrogens.
Caleob King: to get 18. So, you'd, you'd find the molecular weight of water by adding up the weight of all the atoms. In this case, the weight of one oxygen and two hydrogen atoms.
Caleob King: That's how I'd get 18.
Caleob King: So, I know that water weighs 18 grams per mole from the periodic table, but I have to decide whether I want to use
Caleob King: This on the top?
Caleob King: Or this on the top.
Caleob King: What do y'all think? A or B?
Caleob King: Which of these conversion factors is most useful to me right now?
Caleob King: Remember, I want to pick one that cancels out the grams of water.
Caleob King: Yeah, and B does that.
Caleob King: For sure.
Caleob King: Grams of water cancels out.
Caleob King: And I am left with the fact that 36 grams is actually 36 over 18,
Caleob King: Which is 2 moles of water.
Caleob King: Which kind of makes sense. If 1 gram… if 1 mole of water weighs 30, 18, then 2 moles weighs 36.
Caleob King: Okay.
Caleob King: So, that's the kind of thing we did last time.
Caleob King: But converting to mass isn't the only thing we might want to do.
Caleob King: Mass is really easy to figure out when we're talking about solids, and we're in the lab.
Caleob King: But, often when we're trying to think about gases, it's really hard to measure the mass of a gas. I mean, when you think about it, how would you weigh the amount of helium in a balloon?
Caleob King: Any thoughts on how you would do that?
Caleob King: What would be the problem with sticking that on a scale?
Caleob King: Why can't you just stick a balloon full of helium on a scale, see what it weighs?
Caleob King: It would float off, it wouldn't weigh anything, but we know that it has some mass, but we can't use a scale to figure it out. It turns out with gases, it's hard to measure their mass, because it's so small, and we're… kind of live in an ocean of gases already. Instead, it's sometimes easier to measure their volume.
Caleob King: All right, like, what if I happen to know that, we had a balloon?
Caleob King: That was, like, 3 liters.
Caleob King: of helium.
Caleob King: Alright? And I wanted to convert that to moles.
Caleob King: That would be awesome.
Caleob King: But I would need a conversion factor between, Between, volume and moles.
Caleob King: And that we can't get from the periodic table.
Caleob King: We can still do the same thing, 3 liters, of helium.
Caleob King: Alright? Times some conversion factor, and we want to end up with moles of helium at the end.
Caleob King: In order to get this conversion factor, it turns out it's the same for all, or close to the same for all gases.
Caleob King: At standard temperature and pressure, it turns out
Caleob King: That this is our conversion factor, that 22.4 liters of gas make 1 mole.
Caleob King: Alright.
Caleob King: 22 liters, that's,
Caleob King: A little less than 3 meters on a side, so a little less than 9x9x9.
Caleob King: Room?
Caleob King: Would get you… would… would take about 1 mole of gas.
Caleob King: There's probably about a mole of gas in my little office right here.
Caleob King: But the big question is, do we want to use 22.4 liters per mole, or 1 mole per 22.4 liters? Now, there's two ways you could do this. One way is you could look at this diagram and say, I'm trying to go from moles…
Caleob King: from… from, volume to moles, so I'm gonna use this one over here. But,
Caleob King: We don't have to do that.
Caleob King: we can use dimensional analysis to say, you know what, I don't want leaders anymore.
Caleob King: So, I'm gonna put the 22.4 liters on the bottom here.
Caleob King: Right? And so this leaves 3 over 22.4.
Caleob King: And if we put that in the calculator, we see that's about .13 moles.
Caleob King: By the way, If we wanted to know how much, how much mass there was in that balloon.
Caleob King: What'd you not want to know?
Caleob King: Remember I said we could chain these together? 22.4… Liters in one mole.
Caleob King: I will tell you that helium has a molecular weight of 4, grams… Per one mole.
Caleob King: Also, 1 mole… For 4 grams.
Caleob King: Which one do you think we should do here?
Caleob King: Which one of these… Looks like we need to, we need to use that.
Caleob King: Should we be multiplying by 4 or dividing by 4 here?
Caleob King: What do you think?
Caleob King: Which one of these cancels out what we want to cancel out?
Caleob King: Theaters are already canceled out.
Caleob King: Right, we want the one on the bottom here. Why? Because it cancels out the moles and leaves us with the grams, that's what we want.
Caleob King: The answer there is .54 grams.
Caleob King: of helium.
Caleob King: In that balloon.
Caleob King: Alright, give me a 0 through 5 on how you're feeling on that.
Caleob King: We, what we did is we started out with volume, We went down to moles.
Caleob King: And then we went over to Mass.
Caleob King: But all roads really lead through moles. Moles is, like, the center of this map.
Caleob King: You could even think of it as the center of chemistry.
Caleob King: Okay…
Caleob King: How about this one?
Caleob King: How much space…
Caleob King: Do you think… a billion…
Caleob King: billion… O2 molecules take up.
Caleob King: Alright, a billion billion.
Caleob King: A billion is… 9 zeros.
Caleob King: So we're actually doing 18 zeros here.
Caleob King: That's a lot of molecules.
Caleob King: What do you think? Does that take up,
Caleob King: The space of a, a balloon.
Caleob King: A small room.
Caleob King: a small house, a stadium.
Caleob King: What do you think?
Caleob King: Tell me what you think, and then tell me how sure you are of your answer.
Caleob King: It's okay to guess.
Caleob King: I… I really want you to kind of guess here, it's… it's okay.
Caleob King: Anybody else? What do you think?
Caleob King: Does it help if I write this as 1 times 10 to the 18th?
Caleob King: What do you notice about that number, in relation to some other numbers you might know from chemistry?
Caleob King: How many, how many, particles is a, is a mole?
Caleob King: of O2.
Caleob King: How much is the mole?
Caleob King: A mole is like a dozen, it's a large number, a very, very, very large number.
Caleob King: If we're ever trying to convert from particles back to moles, Alright.
Caleob King: This is the conversion factor we're looking for. 6 times 10 to the 23rd, that's 6 with 23 zeros after it.
Caleob King: 6 with 23 zeros after it. That's how big a mole is.
Caleob King: Alright?
Caleob King: So a billion billion seems like a lot.
Caleob King: But when you're talking about particles, so small as atoms and molecules, a billion billions, not that big.
Caleob King: Alright, the, I think you'll see that the real answer here is none of the above, but we're gonna, we're gonna, we're gonna work it out.
Caleob King: I'm gonna show you what it, what it looks like.
Caleob King: This is much, much less.
Caleob King: Then 6.02 times 10 to the 23rd, right?
Caleob King: Something with 23 zeros after it, much, much bigger.
Caleob King: But if we wanted to figure out the space in there.
Caleob King: Right? If we wanted to figure out how… if we go from count of particles to how much space it takes up.
Caleob King: We can follow this map again.
Caleob King: We're gonna go from particles… To moles, and from moles up to volume.
Caleob King: Right? That's what we're gonna do.
Caleob King: So, that's our plan.
Caleob King: We've got 1 times 10 to the 18th particles.
Caleob King: Alright.
Caleob King: And we're gonna use this conversion factor, 6.022, Times 10 to the 23rd.
Caleob King: particles.
Caleob King: in 1 mole.
Caleob King: But we're not done yet.
Caleob King: We're to say 1 mole of is 22.4 liters Oh, space.
Caleob King: And if we set this up, The particles cancel out.
Caleob King: The moles cancel out.
Caleob King: And that's what we're left with.
Caleob King: What is the toughest part there?
Caleob King: Is the part… is the toughest part there knowing, which conversion factor to use, which one to put on top or bottom, or I don't know, what do y'all think? Is that… is that something you think you could do on your own? Maybe with a little help?
Caleob King: How are you doing on those sorts of calculations?
Caleob King: Sorry, I'm just typing this into my calculator.
Caleob King: There we go.
Caleob King: This is how many liters a billion billion oxygen molecules take up.
Caleob King: It takes up .000004.
Caleob King: leaders.
Caleob King: A billion billion may sound like a lot.
Caleob King: Alright.
Caleob King: But it is, something like…
Caleob King: 4 hundredths of a millimeter.
Caleob King: cubic millimeter.
Caleob King: In, in volume.
Caleob King: Very, very small.
Caleob King: Okay.
Caleob King: Alright, so we've gone, from… particles to volume,
Caleob King: I got one.
Caleob King: How about a billion, billion, billion, billion? No, no, a billion, three billions, three billions.
Caleob King: Alright.
Caleob King: And I wanted to know how much it weighs.
Caleob King: So, this is another 9 of these.
Caleob King: 1 times 10 to the 27th.
Caleob King: Alright.
Caleob King: Which, by the way…
Caleob King: is greater… than this.
Caleob King: Do you think this weighs as, much as a… Paperclip?
Caleob King: As much as a person.
Caleob King: As much as a car, Or,
Caleob King: As much as a fully loaded rocket on the way to the moon.
Caleob King: By the way, is anyone else watching the Artemis missions? I'm kind of excited about it.
Caleob King: I know, what's everyone vote? What's everyone's vote? Paperclip? Person?
Caleob King: R. Rocket.
Caleob King: Anybody else?
Caleob King: Y'all are shy about guessing.
Caleob King: Are you just being quiet, or are you afraid to be wrong?
Caleob King: I want to get one more guest in there.
Caleob King: Maybe a raising of hands? Raising of hands for paperclip?
Caleob King: Maybe a raising of hands for about the weight of a person?
Caleob King: Weight of a car?
Caleob King: Weight of a rocket. What do you think?
Caleob King: I'm starting to think that you aren't gonna guess.
Caleob King: Okay, fine, fine.
Caleob King: Can you at least confirm you hear me okay?
Caleob King: Making sure I'm coming through alright.
Caleob King: Sydney, Jaylee, Henry?
Caleob King: Ailey?
Caleob King: Okay, good, good, alright.
Caleob King: We're doing good. Mason, good to hear from you, too. All right.
Caleob King: Alright, well, that's okay. We'll do the calculations, we'll see, and then we'll call it a day.
Caleob King: We've got a particle count.
Caleob King: 1 times 10 to the 27th.
Caleob King: And we're gonna go from particles to moles, and from moles to mass. That's our plan.
Caleob King: Alright?
Caleob King: So… 1 times 10 to the 27th?
Caleob King: articles.
Caleob King: I happen to know that 6.022
Caleob King: Times 10 to the 23rd particles.
Caleob King: Make one mole.
Caleob King: For oxygen, if we looked in the periodic table, we would see that oxygen Weighs 15.99999.
Caleob King: grams per mole. Close enough to 16 that I'm going to call it 16 grams per mole.
Caleob King: But this is not an oxygen, oxygen atom, this is an O2 molecule, so it's actually going to weigh 16 times 2, or 32,
Caleob King: grams.
Caleob King: In one mole.
Caleob King: My question to you… Is it grams over moles, or moles over grams?
Caleob King: Which one? Which one do you like? Moles over grams? Grams over moles?
Caleob King: Keep your eye on the wall. Where are we going?
Caleob King: Particles canceled out already.
Caleob King: We're trying to cancel out the moles, how do I do that?
Caleob King: Yeah, I'm trying to decide whether if,
Caleob King: I should do 1 mole per 32 grams, or if I should do 32 grams per 1 mole.
Caleob King: For my next conversion factor.
Caleob King: Basically, which should be on the top, which should be on the bottom?
Caleob King: I have to decide which is on the bottom, whether I'm multiplying by 32 or dividing by 32, essentially.
Caleob King: 32 over 1 is it. Yes, absolutely. Thanks for answering that. Yeah, I appreciate it. moles are gonna cancel out, which is why I'm doing this, right?
Caleob King: So I've gone all the way from particles to grams.
Caleob King: Alright,
Caleob King: If we wanted to do this.
Caleob King: I would find this weighs about 53,000 grams.
Caleob King: Or about 53 kilograms.
Caleob King: 53 kilograms, you know… It's,
Caleob King: You know, 130 pounds, 120 pounds, something like that.
Caleob King: Alright.
Caleob King: So, at the end of this, it's 53.
Caleob King: 1,000 grams.
Caleob King: We're about 53 kilograms.
Caleob King: you know.
Caleob King: A little bit more than 110 pounds.
Caleob King: Right there. So, I would say this weighs, as much as a slight but,
Caleob King: Weighs as much as a person.
Caleob King: Alright.
Caleob King: Okay.
Caleob King: So…
Caleob King: I hope we're doing okay with that. I think I'm gonna stop there. I just want you to… I want to remind you that when we're doing these things, what we're doing is we were… we're trying to convert from mass…
Caleob King: or number of particles, or volume. Some things we might know, some things we might know.
Caleob King: Everything goes through the mold.
Caleob King: Alright.
Caleob King: So, just know that if you're in one area, and you want to get to another area, you have to convert to moles first, almost always.
Caleob King: Well…
Caleob King: I hope everybody has a good day. I will still be here next week, although it sounds like a lot of you, will be at, state testing, but I will be at State Testing the
Caleob King: No wait, no wait, let me,
Caleob King: Let me look at it right here.
Caleob King: No, next week! Next week, I will be at State Testing, in Topeka. So, I will not be here for the Monday and Thursday lessons.
Caleob King: So…
Caleob King: keep an eye out, we're gonna be, I might do the sample work so that you can look at that. But other than that, no classes next week for me.
Caleob King: Let me know if there's anything you have questions on, I'm here for help.
Caleob King: Everybody have an awesome day, enjoy the beautiful weather.
Caleob King: Bye.
Caleob King: Jaylee Henry?
Caleob King: Mason? Daly?
Caleob King: Sydney?
Caleob King: It's good to see ya.
Caleob King: Yep, bye.